Hello everyone welcome back
to exploring quantum physics.
I'm Charles Clark, and in this lecture
we're going to use the theory of
Angular Momentum to understand how
matter interacts with electric fields.
In our previous lecture we looked
at the role of angular momentum.
In terms of this contribution to
the kinetic energy of a free particle.
So, just to recall what we showed was,
that, here's the kinetic energy operator,
for a particle moving in three dimensions,
squared.
And this turns out to break
down into a part that
just depends upon the distance from the
coordinate origin, spherical symmetric,
and then a contribution of
the angular momentum operator.
Which is dependent upon the angles, the
directions in space that a particle makes.
In fact,
you're probably familiar with, an instance
of this in a somewhat different context.
And that is for
the case of a rigid rotator in space.
So in classical mechanics,
the kinetic energy of a rigid rotator
of mass, M, and radius,
R, Is given by this,
its L squared over 2Mr squared.
And, so,
if we look at a simple rotating molecule
with two massive pieces, then we get
this expression for the kinetic energy,
just the square of the angular momentum
divided by twice the reduced mass and
the distance between these two
other masses taken as points.
And you can easily derive this
just by looking at the kinetic
energy of the two particles
as they rotate but
are constrained to move
at a constant distance.
It turns out that this is a rather
good approximation for the rotational.
Motions of molecules which hare very
important in say thermodynamics and gases.
The rotational motor of a molecule
is sort of lowest energy
beyond just simple translation, and
the rotational states of molecules
coming into great interest.
In the particular context of
production of altered code molecules
for study of quantum gases.
So we're going to look at an example
that is based on one such molecule,
potassium-rubidium and understand
what the rotational dynamics for
that system are also in
the previous lecture we
introduced a system of a set of special
function the spherical harmonics
which we generally useful for
describing states of angular momentum.
Here's a conventional definition,
notation and
you can find more information about
these in the, this particular section.
The digital library of
mathematical functions.
Now just as you saw that the role of
angular momentum for a free particle
is very similar to its role for
a constrained system of particles.
It turns out that for
describing angular motion
this set of functions has a sort
of universal applicability.
Many branches of physics
describe wave motion optics
electrodynamics theory of elasticity and
so on.
And I'm not going to dwell In depth
of the properties of these functions.
But you should know a little
bit about the simple ones, and
the general things that
they make possible.
So basically,
you can think of these as a set of
functions that's useful for describing
variations of any type of function
defined on the surface of a sphere.
So they're defined.
In terms of the polar
coordinates of three dimensions,
the polar angle theta and the angle phi.
They're the indices index L,
which represents the magnitude of angular
momentum goes from 0 to infinity.
And then m which is
a projection of that projection
of m particular chosen axis,
typically the z axis or
x three axis runs from line to cell to l.
Now if you just open a book and
look at expressions for
circle harmonics They can tend
to be a little bit confusing.
So I'm going to give you a useful
mnemonic to thinking about them.
Basically, you can always
think of a spherical harmonic
in terms of the generalized polynomial.
That is, it consists of,products
of the three coordinates,
x1, x2, x3, where the net power,
a plus b plus c,
is equal to l,
the index of the spherical harmonic.
All divided by an inverse power,
r to the minus l.
So you see this is dimensionless says this
is inverse units of length the alpha
this is inverse units of length.
And furthermore the spherical
harmonics all obey this relation.
So in other words if you take the
Laplacian and apply it to the numerator
here Then, it vanishes.
Now you might ask how helpful this is.
Well, I think you'll see quickly that
this enables you to test whether
something is spherical harmonic and even
to be constructive in creating your own.
So you see for the low order
harmonics l equals zero, one, and
two, you can quickly recognize them
just by applying the Laplacian and
you can even make your own
to suit your own purposes.
That is you can form a polynomials that
will suit your particulars at the moment.
From just more or
less arbitrary hours coordinates.
So I'd like to also note another important
result of this definition is that,
you see all the spherical
mnemonics of a degree l have
a net power of l In the cartesian
coordinates, and so
that means that under
inversion of all coordinates,
the circle harmonics either
remain the same if L is even or
change sign if L is odd.
So for the next two,
few parts of this lecture,
we're going to look at an application
to discussing the rotational
motion of the molecule potassium.
This is one of the great targets for
Ultracold molecule research.
Here's a recent paper by one of
the leading troops in the field.
That's accessible through
science magazine or you can look
on Google Scholar and
find references to this work.
Basically there's a big milestone
in making very cold molecules which
are of interest to wide range
of scientific applications and
just technically fascinating and
challenging to work with.
So the properties of
potassium-rubidium are well known.
The reduced of this molecule
is given by this number.
The equilibrium radius is not that
well known at the moment, but
we'll take this common value of,
0.4 nanometers.
And one important aspect
of this molecule is that it has
a permanent electrical dipole.
For a moment in it's body frame.
Now what I mean by that is,
if you just hold the molecule in one
place there's an imbalance of charge.
There's more negative charge
around the potassium and
more positive charge around the rubidium.
And that means that this molecule acts
like an electric dipole when it's
exposed to an external field.
We'll discuss that momentarily.
But, when there's no electric field
present then the Hamiltonian Conlan that
describes the rotational motion of this
molecule is just given by this L squared
over two mu r and e squared where
r is equilibrium bond length, and
I've converted that so that's L times L
plus one times h bar squared over two mu
re squared and I've converted that to
an energy In temperature equivalent
units just because it's convenient for
these cold molecule applications.
And so you can see that this equivalent
temperature which is basically half
the distance between the l equals zero.
And the allele equal one rotational
state is equivalent to 55 milicalvin.
Very low temperature.
Much cooler than heat for example.
Now we use the dimoment for the molecule
As a convenient reference through axis so
we're going to describe the orientation
of the molecule with respect to some
arbitrarily chosen laboratory
frame the x 3 x laboratory frame.
In terms of the angle what
it returns we In terms of
the given Cartesian frame, we describe
the orientation of the molecule by
the angle that its dipole moment makes
with respect to the various axes.
Now, in the ground state of the molecule,
it's the The lowest spherical
harmonic is just a constant,
that's something you
should always remember.
The first,
l equal one is just either xy or x1, x2 or
x3 or some other combination of them.
And this means that the dipole moment
is oriented randomly in space,
so there is no net dipole.
Moment of the molecule when we
go to make a measurement of it,
it could be in any arbitrary direction.
So we're now going to address
the question of how we orient and control